Let's move on to Array Types.
So you're familiar, hopefully,
with JavaScript arrays.
So there's fileExtensions, and
you can see that we've got,
wait, what's going on here?
That is not valid code,
that should have stayed a comment.
fileExtensions, we've got js and
ts in an array.
We can see that Typescript has
inferred that this is string and
then a pair of square brackets after it.
That is how you describe or a preferred
way to describe arrays in TypeScript.
There's also another
way you could do this.
I would encourage you not to do this,
because if you're a React developer,
those little greater than,
less than signs,
they will clash with your JSX and
cause weird things to happen.
So this is really the preferred
way to type arrays.
And you can see we have inference
there working for us as is.
This works for
more complicated objects, too.
So here's our car object with make,
model, and year.
And we've got a type here
that it's the same as before,
we're just following it with
these square brackets at the end.
So it's all you have to do for
array types.
And what do we mean by arrays?
They're arbitrary length.
We can pop things out of
them until they're empty,
we can fill them up with
a thousand objects.
That is the meaning of
an array in this context.
May seem strange that I'm
defining it that way, but
the next topic we're gonna talk about
is arrays of fixed length, or tuples.
So you may have seen this in
other programming languages.
Some programming languages have
a formalized tuple type that looks very
different from arrays in terms
of the syntax that you use.
Because ultimately we have to create
code that runs as JavaScript,
we're kind of piggybacking on
the JavaScript array type.
Let's look at an example of a tuple here.
So sorry, I'm gonna call this myCar2 just
to not collide with the previous myCar.
So here we've got an array, or
here is an array containing three
elements, a year, a make, and a model.
So it's another way of representing a car,
but we kind of have an implicit convention
here, where we're saying the first
element is gonna be a year.
The second element is gonna be make,
the third element is gonna be model.
And maybe we can pass this around and
we know from some contextual cue
that this is what this means.
This is a car, and
we know how to take this information.
It's almost a row of a CSV or
a spreadsheet or something.
If the column names,
you can make sense of that.
And you can see here, we can take myCar2,
and we can destructure it,
but we run into a problem.
String or number, string or
number, string or number,
those are the types of all
three of those values.
And what's happened here is TypeScript has
made the safest assumption it
can without getting in our way.
And it's more common to use
arrays of arbitrary length.
So you're adding things to them and
you're removing things from them, and
things at certain positions in
the array have special meaning.
That's usually not the case, right?
So we need to do some casting here, and
there were some questions in the chat
earlier, what is the valid use of casting?
Is it always dangerous?
Well, this is a great example of
where casting helps quite a bit.
So here we can see part of the problem is,
We can keep adding stuff to this array or
we can create.
Effectively, we don't have a convention
that TypeScript is helping us with here.
All it's doing is enforcing that
the contents of this array,
every member is either a string or number,
but we can add a bunch of junk here and
TypeScript is not gonna help us.
So, We can either cast or
we can use an explicit
type annotation like this.
So instead of doing something like this,
which is how you type an array of
arbitrary length, with a tuple,
we're gonna put stuff in
between the square brackets.
And we're saying it is
specifically number, string,
string, 2002 Toyota Corolla.
And let's look at what happens here.
So here we're getting type
checking helping us out.
The year is supposed to be the first
element, and it's not here.
So it's saying string is
not assignable to number.
This is supposed to be a string.
And then down here,
we've got too many elements.
We're trying to give it 4,
but it only wants 3.
So these are useful, especially I love
to use these as function return values,
where maybe you have a successful case or
an error case.
I use tuples of length 2 all the time,
where I kind of will have some
indication of success or failure and
then information about the success.
The string error, and then here's
an error that needs to be thrown,
something like that.
So we do get some value in type checking.
Here, we're told we don't have
the correct number of elements, so
that's good, but there's some
interesting stuff that starts to happen.
So let's look at this.
This is an array literal, right,
because it's a value we're creating,
containing three elements.
.length is number, as it should be, right,
cuz we could push stuff into this array.
If only we had a variable, where we had
a handle on it, we could add stuff to it.
But let's look at this tuple,
numPair.length.
it's of length 2.
So TypeScript knows this is a tuple,
the length is always 2,
it's specifically the number 2.
This is a literal type popping up again.
It's the set of values that are 2.
It's got one thing in there, the number 2.
Now, what happens, though,
is we still find that because underneath
the tuple is a JavaScript array.
We're not getting any safety when
it comes to pushing and popping.
Here, we're adding 6,
and so we get 4, 5, 6,
and then we pop, and
then we pop, and then we pop.
And check this out, the length, it's still
saying it's of type 2, but we know this is
effectively empty at this point cuz
we've popped everything out of it.
So it's kind of tuples are nice, but
we haven't really seen a whole
lot of safety here yet,
aside from the original assignment, right?
However, There's a keyword you
can use here called readonly.
And what this does is it
tells TypeScript that it
should treat this as an immutable array.
So here, if we hover over the type, you
can see it's a readonly number, number.
The length, well, we expect it to be 2.
It's still 2, but look what happens here.
Push and pop, they don't exist, we're not
allowed to mess with these things anymore.
So the readonly keyword,
when used with tuples, is pretty cool.
You get very close to a degree of safety,
where you can rely
on these things being the shape
they were when you generated them.
What would you do if you wanted to
guarantee a fixed size array like a tuple
but want to change the values?
Tuples inherently allow you to do that.
Let's see how readonly works there.
Yeah, it prevents you from doing that.
So it is a bit of a trade off.
What I would say is, generally,
if you're dealing with immutable
data structures like this,
you will end up just creating a new tuple
that has the rest of an existing tuple.
To change the first element,
you'd probably set a brand new first
element and then spread the old tuple.
Destructure the old first element out,
take the rest, and
spread it into the new tuple,
something like that.
But yeah, that is a consequence
of working with a readonly array.
Abhishek asks,
how do we create a two-dimensional array?
It would just be like this,
same as you would imagine.
There's twod, threed, fourd,
fived into the multiverse we go.
Next, we're gonna talk about
structural versus nominal type systems.
We've seen enough of TypeScripts so
far to sort of develop an intuition for
how TypeScript works.
And I wanna compare this to
other programming languages and
other type systems you
might see in the wild so
you can understand how TypeScript
is a little bit different.
This is an important part of building
that mental model we talked about,
where knowing what TypeScript means
when it's checking to see whether two
values are compatible.
We wanna understand how
TypeScript does that.